Document Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client (#21862)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/diagnostics/microsoft-diagnostics-netcore-client.md

### Print names of all .NET processes that published a diagnostics server to connect

This sample shows how to use `DiagnosticsClient.GetPublishedProcesses` API to print the names of the .NET processes that published a diagnostics IPC channel.

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client/csharp/PrintProcessStatus.cs":::

### Parse events in real-time for a specified period of time

This sample shows an example where we create two tasks, one that parses the events coming in live with `EventPipeEventSource` and one that reads the console input for a user input signaling the program to end. If the target app exists before the users presses enter, the app exists gracefully. Otherwise, `inputTask` will send the Stop command to the pipe and exit gracefully.

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client/csharp/PrintEventsLive.cs":::

### Attach an ICorProfiler profiler

This sample shows how to attach an ICorProfiler to a process via profiler attach.

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client/csharp/ProfilerAttach.cs":::

> ## API Description

Reviewer: I'd suggest moving the API description to a separate file, and then adding the following metadata at the top:

```
ms.topic: reference
```

Also if you can standardize to the [API reference wording](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-api-docs/wiki), that would be good. For example, a get-only property description starts with "Gets ..." and a read-write property starts with "Gets or sets ...".

Reviewer 2: I agree.

Where does the source for the library live? Is it /// commented?

This section describes the APIs of the library.

> ### class DiagnosticsClient

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### DiagnosticsClient class
```

```cs

> public DiagnosticsClient
> {
>     public DiagnosticsClient(int processId);
>     public EventPipeSession StartEventPipeSession(IEnumerable<EventPipeProvider> providers, bool requestRundown=true, int circularBufferMB=256);
>     public void WriteDump(DumpType dumpType, string dumpPath, bool logDumpGeneration=false);
>     public void AttachProfiler(TimeSpan attachTimeout, Guid profilerGuid, string profilerPath, byte[] additionalData=null);
>     public static IEnumerable<int> GetPublishedProcesses();
> }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
public DiagnosticsClient
{
    public DiagnosticsClient(int processId);
    
    public EventPipeSession StartEventPipeSession(
        IEnumerable<EventPipeProvider> providers,
        bool requestRundown = true,
        int circularBufferMB = 256);
    
    public void WriteDump(
        DumpType dumpType,
        string dumpPath,
        bool logDumpGeneration = false);
    
    public void AttachProfiler(
        TimeSpan attachTimeout,
        Guid profilerGuid,
        string profilerPath,
        byte[] additionalData = null);
    
    public static IEnumerable<int> GetPublishedProcesses();
}
```

```

```csharp
public DiagnosticsClient(int processId);
```

Creates a new instance of `DiagnosticsClient` for a compatible .NET process running with process ID of `processId`.

`processID` : Process ID of the target application.

```csharp

> public EventPipeSession StartEventPipeSession(IEnumerable<EventPipeProvider> providers, bool requestRundown=true, int circularBufferMB=256)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
public EventPipeSession StartEventPipeSession(
    IEnumerable<EventPipeProvider> providers,
    bool requestRundown = true,
    int circularBufferMB = 256)
```

Formatting

```csharp
public void WriteDump(DumpType dumpType, string dumpPath, bool logDumpGeneration=false);
```

Request a dump for post-mortem debugging of the target application. The type of the dump can be specified using the [`DumpType`](#enum-dumptype) enum.

* `dumpType` : Type of the dump to be requested.
* `dumpPath` : The path to the dump to be written out to.
* `logDumpGeneration` : If set to `true`, the target application will write out diagnostic logs during dump generation.

```csharp
public void AttachProfiler(TimeSpan attachTimeout, Guid profilerGuid, string profilerPath, byte[] additionalData=null);
```

Request to attach an ICorProfiler to the target application.

* `attachTimeout` : A `TimeSpan` after which attach will be aborted.
* `profilerGuid` :  `Guid` of the ICorProfiler to be attached.
* `profilerPath` : Path to the ICorProfiler dll to be attached.
* `additionalData` : Optional additional data that can be passed to the runtime during profiler attach.

```csharp
public static IEnumerable<int> GetPublishedProcesses();
```

Get an `IEnumerable` of process IDs of all the active .NET processes that can be attached to.

> #### class EventPipeProvider

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### EventPipeProvider class
```

```cs
public class EventPipeProvider
{
    public EventPipeProvider(
        string name,
        EventLevel eventLevel,
        long keywords = 0,
        IDictionary<string, string> arguments = null)

    public string Name { get; }

    public EventLevel EventLevel { get; }

    public long Keywords { get; }

    public IDictionary<string, string> Arguments { get; }

    public override string ToString();

    public override bool Equals(object obj);

    public override int GetHashCode();

    public static bool operator ==(Provider left, Provider right);

    public static bool operator !=(Provider left, Provider right);
}
```

```csharp

> public EventPipeProvider(string name,
>                          EventLevel eventLevel,
>                          long keywords = 0,
>                          IDictionary<string, string> arguments = null)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
public EventPipeProvider(
    string name,
    EventLevel eventLevel,
    long keywords = 0,
    IDictionary<string, string> arguments = null)
```

Formatting

> # Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client

Reviewer 2: Missing the metadata yaml header.

> **This article applies to: ✔️** .NET Core 3.0 SDK and later versions

Reviewer 4: Should this message apply to the version of apps the library can _target_ or the version of apps the library can _run_ on?

Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client (also known as the Diagnostics Client library) is a managed library that lets you interact with .NET Core runtime (CoreCLR) for various diagnostics related tasks, such as tracing via [EventPipe](eventpipe.md), requesting a dump, or attaching an ICorProfiler. This library is the backing library behind many diagnostics tools such as [`dotnet-counters`](dotnet-counters.md), [`dotnet-trace`](dotnet-trace.md), [`dotnet-gcdump`](dotnet-gcdump.md), and [`dotnet-dump`](dotnet-dump.md). Using this library, you can write your own diagnostics tools customized for your particular scenario.

## Install

> You can acquire [Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client/) by adding a `PackageReference` to your project. The package is hosted on `NuGet.org`. 

Reviewer 2: Remove trailing space.
```suggestion
You can acquire [Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client/) by adding a `PackageReference` to your project. The package is hosted on `NuGet.org`.
```

> ## Use Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client to write your own diagnostic tools

Reviewer 2: This header is too long for the TOC area

```suggestion
## Write your own diagnostic tool
```

These samples show how to use Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client library. Some of these examples also show parsing the event payloads by using [TraceEvent](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Diagnostics.Tracing.TraceEvent/) library.

### Attach to a process and print out all the runtime GC events in real time to the console

This snippet shows how to start an EventPipe session using the [.NET runtime provider](../../fundamentals/diagnostics/runtime-events.md) with the GC keyword at informational level and how to use the `EventPipeEventSource` class provided by the [TraceEvent library](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Diagnostics.Tracing.TraceEvent/) to parse the incoming events and print their names to the console in real time.

```cs
using Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client;
using Microsoft.Diagnostics.Tracing.Parsers;
using System.Collections.Generic;

public void PrintRuntimeGCEvents(int processId)

> {

Reviewer 2: All of the code in this article is pretty big, it should be moved and referenced as a snippet. See the paragraph that starts with **or code snippets, create a subfolder called snippets inside the folder that contains your article** on https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/contribute/dotnet/dotnet-contribute#make-a-contribution-to-net-docs

You can also look at this article as an example:

- Article: https://github.com/dotnet/docs/blob/master/docs/core/tutorials/library-with-visual-studio.md
- Snippets folder for article: https://github.com/dotnet/docs/tree/master/docs/core/tutorials/snippets/library-with-visual-studio

                { "EventCounterIntervalSec", "1" }
            }
        )
    };
    var client = new DiagnosticsClient(processId);
    using(var session = client.StartEventPipeSession(providers))
    {
        var source = new EventPipeEventSource(session.EventStream);
        source.Dynamic.All += (TraceEvent obj) =>
        {
            if (obj.EventName.Equals("EventCounters"))
            {
                IDictionary<string, object> payloadVal = (IDictionary<string, object>)(obj.PayloadValue(0));
                IDictionary<string, object> payloadFields = (IDictionary<string, object>)(payloadVal["Payload"]);
                if (payloadFields["Name"].ToString().Equals("cpu-usage"))
                {
                    double cpuUsage = Double.Parse(payloadFields["Mean"].ToString());
                    if (cpuUsage > (double)threshold)
                    {
                        client.WriteDump(DumpType.Normal, "/tmp/minidump.dmp");
                    }
                }
            }
        };
        try
        {
            source.Process();
        }
        catch (Exception) {}
    }
}
```

### Trigger a CPU trace for given number of seconds

> This sample shows an example where we trigger an EventPipe session for certain period of time, with the default CLR trace keyword as well as the sample profiler, and read from the stream that gets created as a result and write the bytes out to a file. Essentially this is what `dotnet-trace` uses internally to write a trace file.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This sample shows how to trigger an EventPipe session for certain period of time with the default CLR trace keyword as well as the sample profiler. Afterward, it reads the output stream and writes the bytes out to a file. Essentially this is what [`dotnet-trace`](dotnet-trace.md) uses internally to write a trace file.
```

```cs
using Microsoft.Diagnostics.Tracing;
using Microsoft.Diagnostics.Tracing.Parsers;
using Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client;
using System.Diagnostics;
using System.IO;
using System.Threading.Task;

public void TraceProcessForDuration(int processId, int duration, string traceName)
{
    var cpuProviders = new List<EventPipeProvider>()
    {
        new EventPipeProvider("Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime", EventLevel.Informational, (long)ClrTraceEventParser.Keywords.Default),
        new EventPipeProvider("Microsoft-DotNETCore-SampleProfiler", EventLevel.Informational, (long)ClrTraceEventParser.Keywords.None)
    };
    var client = new DiagnosticsClient(processId);
    using (var traceSession = client.StartEventPipeSession(cpuProviders))
    {
        Task copyTask = Task.Run(async () =>
        {
            using (FileStream fs = new FileStream(traceName, FileMode.Create, FileAccess.Write))
            {
                await traceSession.EventStream.CopyToAsync(fs);
            }
        });

>         copyTask.Wait(duration * 1000);

Reviewer 5: Why is this `copyTask.Wait`? As long as the session is not gone, this will always block for the full duration. You sent the call to a background thread, and then effectively blocked this thread. Is this the best example that we can give here? A Task.WhenAny + Task.Delay may be better, and we should add something to observe the exceptions in `copyTask`.

        traceSession.Stop();
    }
}
```

### Print names of all .NET processes that published a diagnostics server to connect

This sample shows how to use `DiagnosticsClient.GetPublishedProcesses` API to print the names of the .NET processes that published a diagnostics IPC channel.

```cs
using Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client;
using System.Diagnostics;
using System.Linq;

public static void PrintProcessStatus()
{
    var processes = DiagnosticsClient.GetPublishedProcesses()
        .Select(Process.GetProcessById)

>         .Where(process => process != null);

Reviewer 5: When would process be null? Also, slightly better
```suggestion
        .Where(process => process is not null);
```

    public override bool Equals(object obj);

    public override int GetHashCode();

    public static bool operator ==(Provider left, Provider right);

    public static bool operator !=(Provider left, Provider right);
}
```

```csharp
public EventPipeProvider(string name,
                         EventLevel eventLevel,
                         long keywords = 0,
                         IDictionary<string, string> arguments = null)
```

Creates a new instance of `EventPipeProvider` with the given provider name, [EventLevel](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.diagnostics.tracing.eventlevel), keywords, and arguments.

```csharp
public string Name { get; }
```

The name of the Provider

```csharp
public EventLevel EventLevel { get; }
```

The EventLevel of the given instance of [`EventPipeProvider`](#class-eventpipeprovider).

```csharp
public long Keywords { get; }
```

A long that represents bitmask for keywords of the EventSource.

```csharp
public IDictionary<string, string> Arguments { get; }
```

An `IDictionary` of key-value pair string representing optional arguments to be passed to EventSource representing the given `EventPipeProvider`.

#### Remarks

> This class is immutable, as EventPipe does not allow a provider's configuration to be modified during an EventPipe session (as of .NET Core 3.1).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This class is immutable as EventPipe does not allow a provider's configuration to be modified during an EventPipe session as of .NET Core 3.1.
```

### class EventPipeSession

```csharp
public class EventPipeSession : IDisposable
{
    public Stream EventStream { get; }
    public void Stop();
}
```

> This class represents an ongoing EventPipe session that has been started. It is immutable and acts as a handle to an EventPipe session of the given runtime.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This class represents an ongoing EventPipe session. It is immutable and acts as a handle to an EventPipe session of the given runtime.
```

* `Triage`: Include just the information necessary to capture stack traces for all existing traces for all existing threads in a process. Limited GC heap memory and information.
* `Full`: Include all accessible memory in the process. The raw memory data is included at the end, so that the initial structures can be mapped directly without the raw memory information. This option can result in a very large dump file.

### Exceptions

Exceptions that are thrown from the library are `DiagnosticsClientException`s or a derived class of it.

```csharp
public class DiagnosticsClientException : Exception
```

#### UnsupportedProtocolException

```csharp
public class UnsupportedProtocolException : DiagnosticsClientException
```

This may be thrown when the command is not supported by either the library or the target process' runtime.

#### ServerNotAvailableException

```csharp
public class ServerNotAvailableException : DiagnosticsClientException
```

This may be thrown when the runtime is not available for diagnostics IPC commands, such as early during runtime startup before the runtime is ready for diagnostics commands, or when the runtime is shutting down.

> #### ServerErrorException

Reviewer 5: Missing `UnsupportedCommandException`. Also, should we document `DiagnosticsClientException` generically as the exceptions that are thrown from the library for it's operations?

## Install

You can acquire [Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client/) by adding a `PackageReference` to your project. The package is hosted on `NuGet.org`.

## Write your own diagnostic tool

These samples show how to use Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client library. Some of these examples also show parsing the event payloads by using [TraceEvent](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Diagnostics.Tracing.TraceEvent/) library.

### Attach to a process and print out all the runtime GC events in real time to the console

This snippet shows how to start an EventPipe session using the [.NET runtime provider](../../fundamentals/diagnostics/runtime-events.md) with the GC keyword at informational level and how to use the `EventPipeEventSource` class provided by the [TraceEvent library](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Diagnostics.Tracing.TraceEvent/) to parse the incoming events and print their names to the console in real time.

> :::code language="csharp" source="snippets/Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client/PrintRuntimeGCEvents.cs":::

Reviewer 2: Put these in a `snippets/Microsoft.Diagnostics.NETCore.Client/csharp` folder. This way we can add other languages such as `vb`.
